1. E Schwann cells
Neuroglial cells surround the neurons providing them with support and protection. They play 
a significant role in phagocytosis and myelin production. Neuroglial cells are of two main types known as microglia and macroglia. Microglia are specialised macrophages found in the central nervous system (CNS) whereas macroglia are found in both CNS and the peripheral nervous system (PNS). Schwann cell s, satellite cells and enteric glial cells are macroglia found in the PNS. Astrocytes, ependymal cells, oligodendrocytes and radial glial cells are macroglia found in the CNS. The most abundant type of macroglia in the PNS is the Schwann cells. However, overall, the most abundant type of macroglia is astrocytes.
2. E Oligodendroglioma
Intrinsic brain tumours include various grades of glioma, astrocytoma, oligodendroglioma, medulloblastoma, lymphoma and ependymoma. Oligodendroglioma is found in 10% of adults and 4% of children with primary brain tumour. The most common form of astrocytoma is gliobastoma multiforme. Extrinsic brain tumours include meningioma, neuroma, epidermoid tumour, glomus jugulare and chordoma.
3. B Cerebellum
Dentate nucleus is one of the four deep cerebellar nuclei that connect cerebellum to other regions of brain. It is phylogenetically the most recent and lateral nuclei. It is located in deep white matter. Other three deep cerebellar nuclei are called fastigial, globose and emboliform nuclei. The largest deep cerebellar nucleus is dentate nucleus and the smallest is an interposed nucleus which is a combined globose and emboliform nucleus.
4. A 5, 7
Astereognosia is associated with a lesion in the somatosensory association cortex that is located in Brodmann's areas 5 and 7. Loss of saccadic eye movement and impaired visual search is linked to lesions in the frontal eye fields (Brodmann's area 8) and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (Brodmann's area 9). Impulsive behaviour and perseveration can be seen as a result of lesions in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (Brodmann's area 9) and anterior prefrontal cortex (Brodmann's area 10). Visual object agnosia is related to lesions in the secondary visual cortex (Brodmann's area 18), associative visual cortex (Brodmann's area 19) and inferior temporal gyrus (Brodmann's area 20). Auditory agnosia can occur as a result of lesions in the superior temporal gyrus (Brodmann's area 22) and primary auditory cortex (Brodmann's area 42).
5. C Alexia and agraphia
The lesion in area 6 is associated with agraphia without alexia and those in areas 7 and 40 are associated with Gerstmann's syndrome. Lesions 18 and 19 can cause alexia without agraphia. However, lesions 39 and 40, and the frontal lobe lesion can cause acalculia. The lesion in area 22 gives rise to Wernicke's aphasia. Test questions: 1 24
6. C Parahippocampal gyrus is significantly smaller
Neuroimaging studies have found that parahippocampal gyrus is smaller in patients with 
schizophrenia compared with controls. Other structural changes noticed in schizophrenia include reduction in the brain mass, temporal lobe, cerebral volumes and overall brain length. There is ventricular enlargement, particularly involving the temporal horn. There is no significant difference in the hippocampal area.
7. C Perforation of the septum pellucidum
Punch-drunk syndrome, also known as boxer's dementia or dementia pugilistica, occurs in professional boxers who are subjected to repeated blows, resulting in concussions. It is a neurodegenerative disease in which individuals present with symptoms suggestive of dementia, parkinsonism, memory loss, and gait and speech problems. On macroscopic examination of the postmortem brain there is evidence of perforation of the septum pellucidum, cerebral atrophy, ventricular enlargement, thinning of the corpus callosum, brain tissue scarring and hydrocephalus. On microscopic examination there is evidence of neuronal loss, collections of senile plaques and neurofibrillary tangles.
8. E Temporal lobe
Macroscopic changes in Alzheimer's disease include global brain atrophy, ventricular brain enlargement and widening of the sulci. In this disease, atrophy is most significant in the frontal and temporal lobes of the brain. In Pick's disease, histopathological changes are noticed in cerebral cortex, basal ganglia, locus ceruleus and substantia nigra.
9. B Knife blade gyri
Pick's disease is a rare neurodegenerative disorder. In this disorder there is asymmetrical atrophy of the frontal and temporal lobes with sparing of the occipital and parietal lobes. The cerebral atrophy is so severe that some of the gyri are extremely thin, which is also known as knife blade gyri. In this disease, ventricles are enlarged. In Alzheimer's disease, there is global brain atrophy and sulcal widening.
10. A Generalised cerebral atrophy
Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease (CJD) is a fatal degenerative brain disease.
CJD is transmitted by infection with a prion, which is a protein in misfolded form. There are several 
types of CJD such as sporadic, variant, familial and iatrogenic types. In CJD there is selective 
cerebellar atrophy, generalised cerebral atrophy and ventricular enlargement. On histopathological examination there is a spongiform appearance to the brain tissue due to death of nerve cells. Neurofibrillary tangles, neuritic plaques and neuronal loss are histological changes found in dementia caused by Lewy bodies.
11.  A Combined growth hormone-releasing hormone  
and somatostatins
Growth hormone is secreted by somatotrophic cells which are located within the anterior pituitary gland. It is under the stimulatory effect of growth hormone-releasing factor (GHRH or somatocrinin) and the inhibitory effect of somatostatins, both of which are released from neurosecretory cells in the hypothalamus. There are a number of other factors such as diet, age, gender, physical activity and stress that influence secretion of growth hormone. Answers: MCQs 25
12. C Glutamate receptors
The ion channels are classified into families on the basis of genetic sequence, homology and 
possibly pore lining α-sub unit type. The main families are transmembrane agents (6 TM, 4/8 TM, 2 TM), inotropic glutamate receptors, nicotinic-related receptors, intracellular calcium ion channels and chloride ion channels. Glutamate receptor is a ligand-gated ion channel. The sodium, potassium and calcium channels are ion-gated channels.
13. C 6 cm²
International 10–20 system is a recognised system that describes the electrode placement on the scalp in an electroencephalogram (EEG) investigation. In this system, the scalp is divided into a grid that helps in compensating for the different head size in different patients. Each electrode records approximately 6 cm² of the cortical area.
14.  E Variation in both the strength and the density of the 
current loops
Waveforms on an EEG can be monomorphic, polymorphic, sinusoidal or transient. The variations in both strength and density of the current loops lead to development of the characteristic sinusoidal waveform. Monomorphic activity is most likely to be sinusoidal waves. The cortical pyramidal neurons are arranged in radial columns and are directed outward. The membrane potential of the columns fluctuate, as a result of which an electric 'dipole' is generated. This dipole results in an electrical field potential as current flows through both extracellular and intercellular space. The waveform is generated by reciprocal excitatory and inhibitory interaction of neighbouring cortical cell columns. The extracellular component of the current is recorded in the EEG.
15. C Negative feedback on hypothalamus
Cortisol has a negative feedback effect on the hypothalamus, hippocampus and pituitary gland. It is a glucocorticoid steroid hormone that is secreted by zona fasciculata found in the adrenal cortex. It acts via glucocorticoid receptor types I and II. It is secreted in response to exposure to stress. Cortisol levels vary with diurnal changes. It is raised in serum just after awakening and is low in the evenings.
16. A Acetylcholine
A monoamine neurotransmitter can be both a neurotransmitter and a neuromodulator. Aromatic amino acids such as phenylalanince, tryptophan, thyroid hormones and tyrosine produce monoamine neurotransmitters. Dopamine, noradrenaline, adrenaline, serotonin, acetylcholine and histamine are the monoamine receptors. GHRH, glycine and glutamate are the amino acid receptors. Endorphins, cholecystokinin, angiotensin II, neurotensin and corticotrophin-releasing hormone are peptide neurotransmitters.
17. A D1 increase adenylyl cyclase
The dopamine receptors are coupled to G-proteins. The main effectors of dopamine receptors are D1 which increases adenylyl cyclase, D2 which decreases adenylyl cyclase, D3 which decreases adenylyl cyclase, D4 which decreases adenylyl cyclase and D5 which increases adenylyl cyclase. Test questions: 1 26
18. A Neurohormone
A neurohormone is a peptide secretion from neuroendocrine cells. It is released directly into the 
blood and reaches the systemic circulation, e.g. corticotrophin-releasing hormone.
A neurotransmitter is a substance found in and released from a neuron, which thereby transmits an 
impulse from one neuron to another neuron, e.g. acetylcholine.
A neuromodulator is a substance that originates from a postsynaptic site and either potentiates or 
inhibits neuronal transmission, e.g. steroid hormones.
A neuromediator is a postsynaptic substance that results in postsynaptic response, e.g. second 
messenger such as cAMP .
A neurotrophin is a protein substance, again from a postsynaptic site, but it maintains a presynaptic 
neuronal structure and induces the survival, development and function of neurons, e.g. nerve growth factor.
19. A Excitatory amino acid neurotransmitter
N-Methyl- d-aspartate (NMDA) is a type of glutamate receptor, and an excitatory amino acid 
neurotransmitter. Although glutamate activates both ligand-gated ion channels (ionotropic) and G-protein coupled receptors (metabotropic), NMDA is exclusively ionotropic. It has binding sites for glycine and phencyclidine. It has been hypothesised that schizophrenia results from the hypofunction of NMDA.
20. A Huntington's disease
Focal atrophy of the caudate nucleus is often seen on CT or MRI in Huntington's disease. As the illness progresses cerebral atrophy is noticed on neuroimaging. In MRI the characteristic areas of low signal are seen due to abnormal deposition of iron in the basal nuclei in Huntington's disease and Hallervorden–Spatz disease. Alcohol and illicit drug use can give rise to specific atrophy of the cerebellum.
21. C Multiple sclerosis
Neuroimaging, mainly MRI, is helpful in diagnosis and follow-up of patients with multiple sclerosis. It is the commonest cause of demyelination in the CNS and involves the brain's white matter. MRI will show evidence of plaques in well over 90% of the cases, although the location varies because it can affect practically any part of the brain. It is usually difficult to demonstrate white matter disease using CT or MRI. The demonstration of small foci of increased signal (T2-weighted images) is possibly due to demyelination but it could be a non-specific finding seen in a vascular and inflammatory condition such as Behçet's disease or sarcoidosis. In the leukodystrophies, the symmetrical involvement of white matter is usually a characteristic feature.
22. B MRI
A technique that is dependent on the blood oxygenation level is used in functional MRI (fMRI) to detect images that are based on cerebral blood flow and regional activity. When an area of the brain is functionally active due to a task, there is an initial decrease in oxygenated haemoglobin and an increase in deoxygenated haemoglobin and carbon dioxide. After few seconds (2–6 seconds) of neuronal activity, there is an increase in cerebral blood flow to this area of brain, leading to an increase in local oxygenated haemoglobin concentration. It is this level of change in oxygenated haemoglobin that is detected by fMRI. It therefore detects the functionally active brain regions. Answers: MCQs 27
23. B 14N
Magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) is used to measure metabolic changes in conditions such 
as stroke, brain tumours, Alzheimer's dementia and other neurological illnesses. It can also be used to measure metabolic changes in muscle by detecting intramyocellular lipid. MRS involves the use of different nuclei, which in a magnetic field absorbs and emits electromagnetic radiation. 
14N is 
used in the measurement of glutamate, urea and ammonia. 13C and 17O are used in the analysis of 
metabolite turnover rate. 23Na is used for the study of intracellular sodium metabolism. 31P is used 
in the analysis of bioenergetics, identification of unusual metabolites and measurement of pH.
24. A a2-Receptor agonist
Opioids inhibit noradrenaline release, and discontinuation of opioids causes a rebound release of noradrenaline. Lofexidine, an α
2-adrenoceptor agonist, acts by reducing the noradrenergic storm 
that follows discontinuation of opioids. Stimulation of α2-autoreceptors inhibits noradrenergic 
release. Therefore, it is indicated in treating opioid withdrawal.
25. A Buprenorphine
Mu (m) receptors are opioid receptors. Buprenorphine is a partial m agonist opioid, used for analgesia and treatment of opioid dependence. Bupropion is an antidepressant that acts as a noradrenaline and dopamine reuptake inhibitor antidepressant. Buspirone is an anxiolytic that acts as a 5-hydroxytryptamine 1A partial agonist. Butyrophenone is a class of antipsychotic drugs that includes benperidol and haloperidol. Busulphan is a chemotherapy agent.
26. D They are poorly ionised at physiological pH
Ionisation of drugs is largely dependent on the pH of the solution. It affects the absorption, distribution and elimination of drugs in the body. Antipsychotics are not highly ionised at physiological pH. In general, most psychotropic drugs are easily absorbed from the gut and they pass from the plasma to the brain due to their lipophilic property. Most of them are metabolised in the liver and are affected by first-pass metabolism. They are largely bound to proteins in the plasma, but only plasma-free fractions are pharmacologically active.
27. E Volume of distribution increases for lipid-soluble drugs
Total body water and lean body mass decrease in old age, whereas total body fat increases. This leads to an increase in volume of distribution (V
d) for lipid-soluble drugs but a decreased Vd for 
water-soluble drugs. Receptor sensitivity may increase in old age, leading to increased effects of the drugs. Due to delayed gastric emptying and slow motility, absorption is usually slowed down but just as complete. The albumin level decreases so the proportion of free or unbound drug increases. Half-lives are usually prolonged.
28. D Paliperidone
This is metabolised by the cytochrome P450 CYP450-2D6 into its active metabolite, paliperidone. Therefore, paliperidone itself is not a substrate for this enzyme. All the other antipsychotics mentioned in the question are metabolised by this enzyme. Therefore, in theory, their dose should be reduced when a CYP450-2D6 inhibitor (e.g. fluoxetine, paroxetine, duloxetine) is administered concomitantly. In the case of risperidone, it increases the risk of extrapyramidal side effects. Paliperidone injection is indicated for maintenance in patients with schizophrenia who had previously responded to risperidone or paliperidone tablets. Test questions: 1 28
29. C It is highly insoluble in water
Carbamazepine is poorly soluble in water and most other liquids. Hence, it has been difficult 
to develop an intravenous formulation. However, recently a University of Minnesota group has developed intravenous carbamazepine using cyclodextrins. A study published in 2009 suggested that the intravenous formulation was safe, although it will be long before it is available for use in patients. Carbamazepine dissolves rapidly into the tissues with 70–80% plasma bound. It has a half-life of 26 hours (18–54 hours) after the first dose.
30. B Carbamazepine induces its own metabolism
Carbamazepine is an enzyme inducer and can induce its own metabolism. This is called autoinduction. The half-life of carbamazepine after a single dose is 26 hours (18–54 hours). After repeated use it can be decreased to 5–26 hours.
31. D Partial agonist on acetylcholine receptors
Varenicline is a partial agonist of nicotine acetylcholine receptor. It is used in people who wish to stop smoking. By its partial agonist activity on the α
4β2-subtype of nicotine receptor, it helps in 
reducing the craving and withdrawal symptoms of smoking. Furthermore, it can reduce the positive effects of smoking, thereby helping a smoker to quit.
32.  B Alprazolam, clonazepam, lorazepam,  
midazolam, diazepam
Table 1.1 describes the equivalent dose of commonly used benzodiazepines. The lower the equivalent dose, the higher the potency of the drug.
 Table 1.1 Dose equivalents (DEs) of benzodiazepines
Commonly used benzodiazepine drugs Dose equivalents (lower the DE, higher the potency)
Alprazolam 0.25
Clonazepam 0.5
Lorazepam 1
Midazolam 0.25–1.7
Diazepam 5
Temazepam 5
Chlordiazepoxide 10
Oxazepam 15
33. B Duloxetine
CYP450-2D6 enzyme metabolises various antidepressants including tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), duloxetine and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). It also converts venlafaxine into its active metabolite, desvenlafaxine. Paroxetine, duloxetine and fluoxetine are its potent inhibitors whereas other SSRIs, reboxetine and bupropion are among its weak inhibitors.  Answers: MCQs 29
Concomitant administration of TCAs and SSRIs may require a dose reduction of TCAs. Concomitant 
administration of CYP450-2D6 inhibitors can also interfere with the analgesic effect of codeine.
34.  C By inhibiting the enzyme phosphodiesterase V,  
it raises the levels of cGMP
Normally cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) causes smooth muscle relaxation, resulting in a physiological erection. The cGMP is broken down in the penis by phosphodiesterase-V enzyme. Sildenafil inhibits the enzyme, so helping the levels of cGMP to build up in the penis, leading to an erection. A desire to have sex is essential for sildenafil to work, meaning that it will not work during sleep.
35.  B Non-selective binding to α-subunits of  
GABA-A receptors
There are three types of g-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors: GABA-A, GABA-B and GABA-C. GABA-A receptors have different subtypes depending on the subunits: α (1–6), β (1–3), γ (1–3), δ, ε, π, Ω and ρ (1–3). Zopiclone, eszopiclone and benzodiazepines bind to α
1, α2, α3 and α5 subunits 
of GABA-A receptors. Alpha-1 subtype is critical for sedation and is also linked to daytime sedation, anticonvulsant action and amnesia. Zaleplon and zolpidem are selective to the α
1-subtype and so 
have less risk of tolerance and dependence.
36. B Pharmacodynamic interaction
Pharmacodynamics is the study of the biochemical and physiological effects of the drug on the body. Pharmacodynamic interaction happens when drugs that have same or opposing action are given together. These drugs may alter the sensitivity or response of the body to the drugs. There are some reports of serotonin syndrome due to an interaction between mirtazapine and fluoxetine when co-administered.
37. A MARCKS is a protein kinase substrate
This is an abbreviation for myristoylated alanine-rich C kinase substrate (MARCKS) protein. Recent studies show that the mood-stabilising effect of mood stabilisers are attributed to the effect of medication on MARCKS. It has been noticed that with use of sodium valproate and lithium there is a significant down-regulation of MARCKS expression. Carbamazepine lacks this effect, indicating that the mechanism of mood stabilisation of carbamazepine is different to that of lithium or sodium valproate.
38. A Donepezil
This has a half-life of 70 hours. Galantamine has a half-life of 7–8 hours. Rivastigmine has a half-life of 1.5 hours. Tacrine has a half-life of 24–36 hours. Memantine has a half-life of 60–100 hours.
39. C Neutropenia
This is an idiosyncratic reaction that is difficult to predict. It is dose independent. About 2.7% of patients treated with clozapine develop neutropenia, whereas approximately 0.8% will develop agranulocytosis. Immune-mediated and direct cytotoxic effects can explain this side effect. The treatment for agranulocytosis is to stop clozapine. Another example of an idiosyncratic side effect of an antipsychotic medication is neuroleptic malignant syndrome. Test questions: 1 30
40. A Anorexia nervosa
Normal limits for QTc are <440 ms for men and <470 ms for women. There is a strong evidence that 
a QTc interval >500 ms is associated with a risk of arrhythmia. Hypokalaemia, hypomagnesaemia, hypocalcaemia, long QT syndrome, bradycardia, ischaemic heart disease, myocarditis, myocardial infarction, left ventricular hypertrophy, extreme physical exertion, stress or shock, anorexia nervosa, extremes of age (children and elderly people) and female gender are risk factors for QTc prolongation and arrhythmia.
41. D Simpson–Angus scale
This patient has extrapyramidal side effects due to the use of a depot antipsychotic medication. The Simpson–Angus scale is widely used in clinical trials of antipsychotic drugs to assess extrapyramidal symptoms. It is relatively easy to administer in a clinical setting. The brief psychiatric rating scale is used to rate psychiatric symptoms rather than motor side effects. The Bush Francis scale is used to rate catatonic features. The Barnes' akathisia rating scale is used to assess akathisia. The unified Parkinson's disease rating scale is used to assess Parkinson's disease, not drug-induced parkinsonism.
42. D Mirtazapine
Depression is seen in about 30–40% of patients who survive a stroke. Mirtazapine, nortriptyline, fluoxetine, escitalopram and sertraline are recommended for prophylaxis. SSRIs, nortriptyline and mirtazapine are recommended to treat post-stroke depression. If a patient is prescribed warfarin, citalopram is the recommended SSRI due to fewer drug interactions. When using SSRI in an anticoagulated or aspirin-treated patient, use of a proton pump inhibitor should be considered for gastric protection.
43. C Pregabalin
All of the drugs mentioned are antiepileptic medication. Pregabalin is also licensed for the treatment of generalised anxiety disorder. In addition gabapentin and pregabalin are licensed for neuropathic pain and indicated in conditions such as fibromyalgia. Lamotrigine is also licensed for prophylaxis of bipolar depression. Vigabatrin and tiagabine are usually used as an adjunct treatment for epilepsy.
44. D Stop lithium and continue haloperidol
Lithium is best avoided in the first trimester because of its teratogenic potential. Antipsychotics (preferably first generation, but now evidence is building up for second-generation antipsychotics) should be used as mood stabilisers in pregnancy, if required. This patient is at high risk of relapse if the medications are stopped. There is no need to switch to chlorpromazine. Switching unnecessarily is associated with a risk of relapse.
45. B John Kane
Table 1.2 describes the contribution of key people in psychiatry. Answers: MCQs 31
 Table 1.2 Famous people and their contribution to psychiatry
Name Contribution
John Cade Discovered mood-stabiliser effects of lithium carbonate
John Kane In 1988, John Kane and colleagues conducted a double-blind study 
comparing the efficacy of chlorpromazine and clozapine/clozaril in treatment-resistant schizophrenia and established that clozapine was clearly superior to chlorpromazine
Jean Delay and Pierre Deniker Established antipsychotic effect of the first antipsychotic, chlorpromazine, in the 1950s
Max Fink Best known for his work on electroconvulsive therapy
Nancy Andreasen Known figure in use of neuroimaging in the study of schizophrenia
46. D Its use with alcohol can cause hypotension
Alcohol is metabolised by alcohol dehydrogenase, which is further metabolised by aldehyde 
dehydrogenase. Disulfiram irreversibly inhibits aldehyde dehydrogenase, leading to accumulation of aldehyde in the system, producing symptoms such as flushing, nausea, vomiting and hypotension. It should be used after at least 24 hours of the last alcohol ingestion to avoid any possible disulfiram and alcohol reaction.
47. E Oxazepam
Longer-acting benzodiazepines are likely to be accumulated in the body if liver functions are impaired. It may lead to benzodiazepine toxicity. Therefore, shorter-acting benzodiazepines are preferred such as oxazepam (lorazepam). Diazepam and chlordiazepoxide are drugs of choice for detoxification in normal liver functions. Carbamazepine is used for alcohol detoxification in some countries, but in the presence of liver damage, its use is not recommended. Clonazepam is a longer-acting benzodiazepine.
48. E Telophase
Mitosis and meiosis are two forms of cell division that occur in eukaryotes. Many of the somatic cells go through cell division via the process of mitosis, which is a form of nuclear division. Meiosis is a special form of cell division for sexual reproduction. Mitosis consists of the following stages:
1. Interphase: before a cell enters into mitosis it goes into a growth period called interphase.
2. Prophase: it is a stage in which chromatin condenses into chromosomes.3. Metaphase: it is a stage in which chromosomes get aligned on metaphase plate.4. Anaphase: in this stage paired chromosomes separate and move to the opposite ends of 
the cell.
5. Telophase: it is in this stage that division of the cytoplasm begins.
49. C mRNA
Postmortem examination for gene expression studies are challenging due to problems with variability in intactness of RNA and biological variants. Intact RNA is essential for these studies to be carried out appropriately. Several studies have concluded that mRNA is stable in postmortem human brain and hence can be used for gene expression. Stability of RNA in postmortem tissue differs with the tissue type and also the tissue storage conditions. Test questions: 1 32
50. E Twin adoption study
There has always been a debate about the role of nature and nurture in human development. Twin 
and adoption studies are the methods of choice for finding out relative contribution of both gene and environment on development. Adoption studies largely consider the impact of environment on the development of a child who has been adopted into a family. Heritability is described as what proportion of observed trait in individuals is due to genetic differences. It is mainly studied by conduction family and twin studies. A family study is conducted basically to answer the question: 'Is the phenotype familial?' Linkage analysis answers the question, 'Where the genes located?' Association analysis helps to find out, 'what the responsible genes are. '
51. D Transcription
It is the first step of gene expression in which information from the DNA molecule is transcribed onto an RNA transcript. This process takes place in the nucleus of the cell and consists of five steps: preinitiation, initiation, promoter clearance, elongation and termination. Translation is the process of making proteins from the RNA molecule and takes place in the cytoplasm with the help of ribosomes. Replication, as the name suggests, is a process in which the DNA or genetic material produces a duplicate copy of itself. Modification is a change in phenotype, which is influenced by environmental factors and is not a heritable trait.
52. B It is a ratio of genetic variance to phenotypic variance
Heritability is measured by concordance rate among twin pairs. It is ratio of genetic variance to phenotypic variance (h
2 = Vg/Vp), where h2 is heritability and Vg is genetic variance and Vp is the 
phenotypic variance. A heritability of 1 will indicate that all the phenotypic variability is due to genetic variance. The proportion of proband twins who have an affected co-twin is called probandwise concordance rate and the proportion of twins where both are affected with the disorder is called pairwise concordance rate.
53. D Linkage analysis
Genetic linkage is described as investigating the co-segregation of the disease and a set of genetic markers while studying disease in families. The aim of linkage analysis is to determine the location of the gene(s) on a chromosome for a trait of interest, e.g. a common disease. A number of genetic disorders associated with intellectual disability are associated with chromosomal rearrangements such as Down's syndrome (trisomy 21), and the phenotype seems to arise because of the loss (e.g. monosomy) or addition (e.g. trisomy) of dosage-sensitive genes of unrelated functions. While studying population genetics, the term used to describe the non-random association of alleles at two or more loci, which might or might not be on the same chromosome, is called linkage disequilibrium. Genomic rearrangement is described as major changes in the size of the DNA from 
a few hundred base-pairs to megabases by processes such as deletion, insertion, translocation, 
duplication and other mutational changes. The gene dosage effect refers to the number of gene copies that are present in a cell or nucleus.
54. B Genetic association analysis
In linkage analysis, random DNA markers (consisting of DNA polymorphism) are used as proxies for any nearby risk genes. However, to determine if a particular or specific gene variant is directly affecting the risk for the disorder, or is very tightly linked to such a gene, the most appropriate method is genetic association analysis. Answers: MCQs 33
55.  B Markers will not undergo recombination and  
will be inherited together
Genes that are tightly located near each other on a chromosome tend to be inherited together on 
meiosis during gene expression. These gene markers are inherited together without undergoing recombination and hence are termed 'genetically linked' . The logarithm of odds (LOD) score is a method used in linkage analysis to determine the frequency of recombination. The LOD score of –2 or less excludes linkage at that particular value of recombinant fraction and that a LOD of 3+ indicates 1000 to 1 odds that the linkage observed is not by chance.
56.  A For association studies, the DNA marker has  
to be in the disease gene itself
Genetic association studies are used to find out if there is a correlation between a disease and genetic variation. It is used to identify the candidate gene that may have played a role in a particular disease. A DNA marker has to be in the disease gene itself or very tightly linked to it. In linkage analysis, linkage can be detected between the markers over large distances. The linkage analysis can be used to 'scan the genome' . Mutation analysis of polymorphisms is carried out by association analysis. It is popular in clinical and genetic counselling settings. There is documented evidence that there is an association between the human leukocyte antigen system and several diseases, such as type 1 diabetes mellitus and multiple sclerosis. The power of association is related directly to the quantitative trait locus (QTL) heritability, whereas the power of linkage is more 
closely related to the square of the QTL heritability.
57.  B Most genes encode peptides and are transcribed  
by RNA polymerase 2
Expression of genetic information is unidirectional from DNA to RNA to polypeptides, and involves 
transcription which is in 5´-3´ orientation. Only one strand acts as a template called template/antisense strand, and the other strand as non-template/sense strand. In the process of transcription, three RNA polymerases (1, 2 and 3) including transcriptional factors are involved. RNA splicing, capping and polyadenylation are post-transcriptional. They occur in the nucleus and involve the mRNA. This is then followed by translation, wherein mRNA is transported from the nucleus into the cytoplasm and translation occurs in ribosomes by using tRNA. Messenger RNA has a codon and tRNA has anticodons that are complementary to each other. This leads to production of polypeptides. In most cases, the initiation codon is AUG; mRNA continues to be translated until a 
termination codon has been reached. There are many amino acids that need several codons for 
their expression whereas tryptophan and methionine are specified by a single codon. There is post-translational modification including methylation, phosphorylation and other.
58. B Fragile X syndrome
This syndrome is the second most common specific cause of learning disability after Down's syndrome, although it is the most common inherited cause for learning disability. It accounts for 10% of learning disability. It is usually of mild to moderate in severity. Its clinical features include enlarged testes, large ears, long face and flat feet. Gaze aversion is a striking feature in affected males. There is CGG trinucleotide repeat in the fragile X mental retardation-1 (FMR1) gene present 
at a fragile site at Xq27.3, and this is the cytogenetic marker. Around 1% of children with autistic 
disorder have fragile X syndrome and 30% of fragile X syndrome patients have autistic features. Test questions: 1 34
59. B Respiratory perturbations
Perturbation or disturbance in respiration has been most convincingly linked to panic disorder in 
adults. It is shown to aggregate in families and increases familial risk of panic disorder. However, in children, respiratory perturbations are associated with separation anxiety disorder.
60. E Serotonin
One of the most robust findings in autism research has been an increased level of peripheral serotonin in a third of children with autism. Recent studies have identified a candidate gene for autism known as CELF6. Mutation in this gene is associated with a decrease in levels of serotonin and autism-like symptoms. Possible involvement of dopamine is indicated by the presence of stereotypy motions in autism.
61. D 60:40
In a landmark study by Kendler and colleagues on twins, the percentage ratio of direct:indirect effects of genetic liability to depression are 60:40 respectively. The direct effect is a result of the genes transmitted in the family, whereas the indirect effect is largely mediated by stressful events, neuroticism and a past history of depression.
62. B 35%
Numerous studies in family, twin and adopted children have identified the role of genetics and heritability in eating disorders. The concordance rate for anorexia nervosa is 55% in monozygotic twins and 5% in dizygotic twins. The concordance rates in bulimia nervosa for monozygotic and dizygotic twins are 35% and 30% respectively, suggesting that the genetic component is much more important in heritability of anorexia nervosa than bulimia nervosa.
63. E Penetrance
The probability of expression of an allele when present in the genotype is termed 'penetrance' . For example, if 5 out of 10 individuals with the allele express the respective trait, the trait is said to be 50% penetrant. Even when the allele is present, all phenotypes that are expressed will not be manifested to the fullest degree (penetrance 100%), which indicates that even when the allele is present its expression is variable. In medical genetics, it is a term used to describe the likelihood of the allele resulting in the disease. Depending on the degree of penetrance, it can be complete, highly penetrant, incomplete or low penetrant. Ascertainment is a sampling bias possibility in twin studies that can affect the outcomes. This bias can be overcome by using a population-based sample.
64. C Neuroticism
Suicidal behaviour can have a genetic predisposition and certain candidate endophenotypes can influence suicide risk. Some studies have suggested that this genetic predisposition to suicide risk may be independent of mental illness-related risk. Certain personality traits such as impulsivity, aggression and neuroticism are linked to suicide risk. The impulsive–aggressive continuum is related to serotoninergic dysfunction whereas neuroticism is related to γ-aminobutyric acid type A and serotonin dysfunction. Neuropsychological endophenotypes such as decision-making and executive functions also influence the risk of suicide. Changes in the amygdala and prefrontal cortex metabolism are other candidate endophenotypes related to suicide risk. Answers: MCQs 35
65.  A Cerebrospinal fluid 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid A levels
Changes in CSF 5-HIAA levels have been associated with impulsive suicide attempts. This indicates a 
central serotoninergic dysfunction that is due to a TPH2 gene polymorphism.
66. C Low voltage alpha activity
Two kinds of EEG activities are used as endophenotypes in alcohol dependence. Low-voltage α activity has been noticed in healthy non-alcohol-dependent volunteers but who have a positive family history of alcohol dependence. b Waves have been noticed to be different in alcohol dependent patients compared with controls.
67.  A Behavioural disturbances in childhood are 
associated with higher rates of alcoholism
Conduct disorder and behavioural disturbances in childhood lead to higher rates of alcoholism. Studies have shown that alcoholic males with a family history of alcoholism have a greater severity of alcoholism and poorer outcomes than those with a negative family history. Earlier age of onset, <15 years of age at first drink, is associated with increased rates of alcoholism and substance misuse. Children of alcoholic parents are likely to face poor parenting and are exposed to high-risk environments. They have poor performance in school and their occupation. The rates of familial alcoholism are high among poor socioeconomic categories.
68.  D Chromosomal variations in chromosome 4 are  
strongly related to alcoholism
A study in Irish affected sibling pairs of alcohol dependence is a linkage study analysing the genetic aspects of alcohol misuse. The results of the study indicate a strong linkage for a number of alcohol dependence criteria to a broad region of chromosome 4. There was also weak linkage to several other regions including 1q44, 13q31 and 22q11, 2q37, 9q21, 9q34 and 18 p11 for alcohol dependence syndrome.
69. B Autism
Genetic predisposition relates to how high the risk of occurrence of a disease is in relatives. The strongest effect for genetic predisposition is seen in autism and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). It is approximately 50-fold in autism and ADHD, 10-fold in schizophrenia, and 5-fold in anxiety and unipolar depression. Heritability of bipolar affective disorder is 85%, schizophrenia 83% and unipolar depression in females and males 42% and 29%, respectively. The concordance rate for anorexia nervosa in monozygotic twins is 40% and in dizygotic twins 15%.
70. C CREB
CREB is an abbreviation for cAMP-response element-binding protein. It is a transcription factor implicated in wide range of psychiatric conditions. There are studies showing a strong link between CREB activities and alcohol- and substance-seeking behaviour. Regulation of CREB activity could be the mode of action of lithium as well as antidepressants. Test questions: 1 36
71.  E Individuals with the COMT gene val /val  allele are at 
high risk of developing cannabis-induced psychosis
Allelic variation in the COMT gene is associated with an increased incidence of psychosis related to 
cannabis misuse. Individuals who had val  allele were at high risk of developing psychosis compared 
with individuals who had the met allele. Cannabis misuse can cause psychosis in certain individuals and is irreversible in many. Dunedin studies have shown that individuals who give a history of psychotic experiences and use cannabis at age 11 years are associated with increased incidence of psychosis at age 26 years.
72.  B The environmental factors that predispose as well as 
trigger psychiatric disorders
Anthony, Eaton and Henderson coined the term 'environment' . It refers to the totality of equivalent environmental influences and includes predisposing factors such as intrauterine exposure to radiation, teratogens, family income and neighbourhoods, as well as provoking environmental factors that can act as a trigger of psychiatric disorders, such as social stressors and crisis in personal relationships.
73. B Chromosome 22
Deletions on the end of chromosome 22 cause a wide range of physical as well as mental health abnormalities. This includes psychosis that is indistinguishable from schizophrenia.
74.  A The ecological and social settings that an  
individual shares with parents
An ontogenetic niche, described by West and King, means that an organism shares not only genes but also the ecological and social environment with its parents. Nature (genes) and nurture (ecological and social setting) are both important in the overall development of an offspring. They work hand in hand. Sometimes, it is said that nature loads the gun and nurture fires it!
75.  A Environmental factors play a more important role in 
the development of depression than genetic factors
When family studies into first-degree relatives conclude that there is increased incidence of illness in first-degree relatives, all it tells us is that the illness is familial. This could be due to genetic or shared environmental factors. If the study is extended to second- and third-degree relatives then it can provide significant information. If the findings show that there is increased risk of developing depression in parents, siblings and offspring as probands, whereas second- and third-degree relatives do not have the increased risk, this means that environmental factors play a more important role in the development of depression than genetic factors.
76. C 1 in 10
European study of epidemiology of mental disorders (ESEMED) is a multicentric study conducted in six European countries such as Belgium, France, Netherlands, Spain, Italy and Germany. This study is a part of WHO mental health survey initiative. According to ESEMED, the life time prevalence of mental disorders in Europe is 1 in 4 whereas the prevalence of mental disorder in the past 1 year (12-month prevalence) is 1 in 10. Answers: MCQs 37
77. B 2–4 years
The study of Zanarini et al. (2007) noted two main findings: out of the 24 symptoms studied over a 
10-year period < 15% were exhibited; the other 12 symptoms declined less substantially with about 
20–40% still exhibiting at the end of the 10-year period.
78. B 1–5%
The reported prevalence of elderly people in the community with paraphrenia is 0.1–4%. According to Targun and Abbott (1999), the prevalence is 0.2–4.7%. Hence, one can safely assume a prevalence of 1–5% as the right answer in this case.
79. B 10%
Approximately 10% of the elderly population admitted to a psychiatric ward have paraphrenia. Studies suggest that a wide range, from 10% to 63%, of the elderly population in nursing homes have psychotic symptoms.
80. B 5 years
If the onset of dementia is delayed by 5 years, the prevalence can be reduced by 50%. A delay of 6 months can also reduce prevalence by 6%. This delay can be achieved by successful risk reduction strategies.
81. C 10%
Ritchie et al (2010) concluded that elimination of depression from the elderly population can lead to a mean reduction of 10.3% in new cases of dementia over a period of 7 years. In addition, if depression and diabetes are eliminated from the elderly population and there is an increase in fruit and vegetable consumption, there can be a mean reduction of 20.7% in new cases of dementia. Of note is that depression was found to make the biggest contribution.
82. C Prevalence of 10–15%
Problem behaviours in patients with learning disability are commoner in males in the age group 15–34 years. The prevalence is about 10–15%. The prevalence increases with an increase in the severity of the learning difficulty. The problem behaviours tend to be of more than one type and include demanding behaviour, verbal and physical aggression, destructiveness and self-injury. These behaviours are usually long standing.
83. A Early onset is associated with poor prognosis
Alcohol is responsible for 10% of the dementia population. It may contribute to 21–24% of cognitive impairment in mid-adulthood. The frequency of alcohol-related dementia is higher in socioeconomically deprived areas and most of the cases present at age 50–60 years. The earlier the onset of alcohol-related dementia the poorer the prognosis. The prevalence of the Wernicke–
Korsakoff syndrome due to thiamine deficiency is on the rise.
84. C First rank symptoms at the baseline
Possible predictors of course and outcome in schizophrenia are sociodemographic status, initial 
clinical state, treatment response, history of past psychotic episodes and treatment, premorbid  Test questions: 1 38
personality, functioning, type of the onset, family history of psychiatric disorders, variables of brain 
morphology and neurocognition. Good prognosis is indicated in acute onset, prominent affective features, no family history, paranoid subtype, good premorbid adjustment and older age of onset.
85. B It can explore multiple outcomes and exposures
Cross-sectional studies are simplest of all individual-level studies. They are cheaper and quicker than other studies and can explore multiple outcomes and exposures at the same time. They are used to quantify the prevalence of the disease in question. It allows for hypothesis generation based on the aetiology. It does have some limitations such as researcher and recall bias. It is not a feasible study design for rare diseases and does not establish a temporal association.
86. D It is useful to generate a hypothesis
A qualitative study helps in generating a hypothesis. This study is concerned with an individual's personal meanings, experiences, feelings, values and other types of opinions. Qualitative study uses passive observation, participant observation, in-depth interviews and focus groups. The sampling method used is theoretical and is analysed by inductive reasoning and validity.
87. E 60%
According to the WHO, suicide rates have increased by 60% in the last 45 years. The global mortality rate is 16 per 100,000 or one death every 40 seconds.
88. A 15–44 years; males
In the UK from 2000 to 2009, the suicide rate was found to be highest among males aged 15–44 years.
89. E Point prevalence
Prevalence and incidence are two measures of disease frequency.
Point prevalence is the number of individuals with the disease in a population at a particular point 
in time. It is expressed as a proportion. Period prevalence is the number of individuals with the 
disease in a population over a period of time. It is expressed as a rate. Life-time prevalence is the proportion of individuals who have or have had a given disease.
90. D Low incidence, long duration of illness
Prevalence is defined as a proportion of the product of the incidence rate and average duration of a disease.
 Prevalence = Incidence × Duration of illness.
 Hence, prevalence can be high even if incidence is low due to a long duration of illness.
91. A Cumulative incidence
Cumulative incidence or incidence risk is the number of new cases of a disease over a period of time 
out of the total population at risk.
Incidence density or incidence rate is the number of new cases of a disease over a period of time 
out of the total person-time of observation. Answers: MCQs 39
92. E Standardised mortality ratio
The number of deaths observed divided by number of expected deaths multiplied by 100 gives 
the standardised mortality rate (SMR). An SMR of 100 signifies that the standard population and population under study have the same mortality rate. If the 95% CI of SMR exceeds '1' it is considered statistically significant.
93. A Beck's depression inventory
Rating scales used in psychiatry can be self-administered, semi-structured or clinician administered. Beck's depression inventory and Zung's self-rating depression scale are self-administered. The brief psychiatric rating scale, clinical global improvement scale, hamilton's rating scale for depression, Yale–Brown–compulsive scale are all scales that are used for rating symptom severity and change in a mental illness. These scales are administered by clinicians.
94. D To monitor the response to treatment
The Yale–Brown obsessive compulsive scale (Y-BOCS) gives a measure of distress and not anxiety. It is not a diagnostic tool and is used only to assess the severity of the obsessive–compulsive disorder. It is this property of Y-BOCS that is made use of while monitoring the progress of the patient in response to the treatment. It is extensively used in clinical settings. There are 10 questions, 5 for obsessions and 5 for compulsion, and all are rated on a Likert scale with a minimum total score of 0 and a maximum of 40. A score of 0–7 is subclinical, 8–15 mild,16–23 moderate, 24–31 severe and 32–40 extreme.
95. D Halo effect
This effect is a cognitive bias in which there is a tendency to overestimate a response by a rater based on previous impressions, assumptions and judgements. It was termed 'halo effect' by psychologist Edward Thorndike. The Hawthorne effect is an effect whereby patients modify their behaviour just because they are participating in an experimental study. The ceiling effect is when the dependent measure puts an artificially low ceiling on how high a person may score; it can lead to an undesirable outcome. Ecological fallacy is an error of deduction that involves deriving conclusions about individuals just on the basis of an analysis of group data. Central limit theorem: as sample size increase, the sample mean will approach a normal distribution.
96. C 100,000 live births
The maternal mortality rate is the number of maternal deaths per 100,000 live births in the same time period. Maternal death is the death of a woman while pregnant or within 42 days of termination of pregnancy. This does not take into account the duration and site of the pregnancy, any complication or its management. However, it does take accidents and incidental cause into account. Pregnancy-related death is defined as the death of a woman while pregnant or within 42 days of termination of pregnancy, irrespective of the cause of death.
97.  E Unless rehearsed, storage in short-term memory is 
limited to 30 seconds
Transfer of memory into long-term store begins immediately when information enters short-term store. Short-term memory is also known as 'primary' or 'working' memory whereas long-term memory is also known as secondary memory. Encoding is related to concepts of information processing and attention. Unless rehearsed, storage in short-term memory is limited to no more than 30 seconds, with a capacity of around seven units. Theoretically, long-term memory is permanent and has unlimited capacity. Test questions: 1 40
98.  E Neurocognitive impairments usually begin after  
first episode of schizophrenia
Neurocognitive impairments are reliably and broadly present in the first episode of schizophrenia. 
Larger IQ impairments are seen in the first episode compared with later stages. Patients with schizophrenia demonstrate cognitive impairments that range from mild to severe. These impairments are due to neither poor motivation nor the presence of psychotic symptoms. They usually remain stable over time and include deficits in perceptual skills, motor skills, verbal skills, selective attention, spatial and verbal working memory, verbal learning, non-verbal memory, procedural memory, long-term factual memory and executive functions. These impairments are central features of schizophrenia as suggested by their presence before the diagnosis is made.
99.  E The trait approach to personality assessment  
is the basis for the ICD-10 classification.
The informants in personality assessments should have a good knowledge of the person for a number of years. The current assessments of personality, as well as the ICD-10 and DSM-IV classifications, are based on the measurement of traits although this method is of questionable reliability. There are objective and projective personality assessments. An example of an objective personality assessment is the Minnesota multiphasic personality inventory (MMPI). The most researched personality inventory is the MMPI.
100.  B Personality disorder is commonly observed  
among the perpetrators
According to the WHO, there are five types of child maltreatments.
1. Physical abuse
2. Sexual abuse
3. Emotional abuse
4. Exploitation
5. Neglect.
The definitions used by the Government in England and Wales are similar to those used by the WHO, although there may be operational differences. Fabricated or induced illness is a form of child maltreatment more than parental psychopathology, although observations suggest high rates of personality disorder among the observers. The child is harmed directly or indirectly, leading to a variety of presentations.
101.  D Puberty lasts longer than in the  
previous generations
The age of reaching puberty has decreased in the western population from 17 years to below 12–13 years. The average age of menarche in Britain is 12 years and 10 months. One in six girls reaches puberty before the age of 8 years and one in fourteen 8-year-old boys have pubic hair. Puberty starts earlier and lasts longer according to the children of the 1990s' study conducted by Bristol University's Institute of Child Health. It is noticed that boys also mature earlier.
102. E 40%
Thomas et al (1968) conducted a study of temperament in infants in the 1950s. Data was gathered initially by parental interviews that looked at nine traits that were combined to describe three temperament types. Answers: MCQs 41
 Table 1.3 Types of temperament
Temperament Percentage 
in cohortDescription
Easy 40 Playful, regular patterns of eating and sleeping, adapted easily to new situations
Difficult 10 Irritable with irregular eating and sleeping patterns. Responded negatively to new situations
Slow to warm 15 Relatively inactive and tends to withdraw from new situations
The remaining 35% of children could not be placed in any one group.
103. C Non-negotiable parents who are strict
There are three main parenting styles described. An authoritarian parenting style is where parents 
do not negotiate and are strict. The boundaries set are clear and rigid. The children tend to have  low self-esteem and can be socially withdrawn. An authoritative parenting style is where parents discuss and explain to the child so that there are firm rules with shared decision-making. The children are usually sociable and popular and have a positive self-esteem. A permissive parenting style is where there are few limits set by the parents with no clear guidelines and the children usually have poor impulse control and display aggression.
104. B Child experiences maternal deprivation
According to Bowlby, if a child before the age of 1 year is separated from the mother when she is working, maternal deprivation is likely to occur. Rarely, privation, where no attachment is formed, may occur. Separation anxiety may develop. Object permanence development will not be affected. The strange situation test is an inappropriate test because the child may not respond when the mother returns as a sign of self-reliance rather than avoidance. This occurs because the child is used to separation.
105.  D Studies use it in the context of intergenerational 
transfer of attachment patterns
The adult attachment interview is a structured interview that explores an individual's experience of attachment relationships in childhood. There are four possible attachment styles such as:
1. Secure/autonomous
2. Dismissive3. Preoccupied/entangled4. Unresolved/disorganised.
Studies mainly use it in the context of intergenerational transfer of attachment patterns or 
intergenerational continuity. In summary, people parent their children as they were parented.
106.  D The paranoid–depressive positions are never  
fully resolved in adult life
The work with regard to paranoid and depressive positions was led primarily by Melanie Klein. In this case, an infant divides the caregiver into an external object that is all good or an internal object that is all bad. This includes two stages known as the depressive position and the paranoid–schizoid  Test questions: 1 42
position. Projection, splitting and projective identification are the primitive defence mechanisms 
observed in the paranoid–schizoid position.
107. E Winnicot
Winnicot proposed the following concepts:
•	Holding environment indicates that, for appropriate development in a child, a parent needs to 
hold them physically and psychologically.
•	Good-enough mother is a mother who needs to be responsive but not extreme, as in too responsive or unresponsive, to ensure adequate emotional development in the infant.
•	Countertransference hate means that parents, like infants, can bring strong emotions to their care such as hate, which needs to be addressed.
108.  E More than one dream idea is combined  
into a single mental image
A dream, according to Freud, is the fulfilment of a wish. Manifest content refers to what we are aware of upon waking. Dream interpretation is the process of making sense of the manifest content of dreams by 'translating' it. In dream work, the latent content, the 'underlying wish' , is changed into manifest content and involves displacement, condensation and concrete representation. Displacement is the dream content that substitutes the target of one's feelings onto another person. Condensation is more than one dream's idea combined into a single mental image. Concrete representation is an abstract concept, revealed in a concrete way and is sometimes called 
dramatisation.
109.  C The symptoms may symbolise the wish with  
which they are linked
Neurotic symptoms are viewed as similar to dreams. Dreams are considered to be the 'royal road to 
unconsciousness' . The symptoms are felt to be the expression of an unconscious and may symbolise the wish to which it is linked. The symptom is usually physical and the cause mental.
110.  B Appropriate roles or goals are abandoned because 
they are perceived as forbidden or dangerous
Cognitive–analytical therapy was devised by Anthony Ryle for use in the UK National Health Service. Three different patterns of unrevisable, maladaptive procedures called traps, dilemmas and snags are described.
Traps are negative assumptions that generate acts which produce consequences that reinforce 
the assumptions. Dilemmas are brought about by the person acting as though the available actions or roles are limited to only polarised alternatives (false dichotomies). Snags occur when the appropriate roles or goals are abandoned because the individual makes an assumption that others would oppose, or because they are perceived as forbidden or dangerous.
111. B Displacement
Defence mechanisms are unconscious ways of dealing with experiences. Denial occurs when the individual does not acknowledge an aspect of reality. Displacement is shifting of the emotion from the real target onto a substitute. Humour is where comedy is used to manage the emotions that arise and express them. Reaction formation is where the individual expresses the opposite of what is felt or thought. In sublimation, an individual channels the emotions towards a socially positive substituted activity. Answers: MCQs 43
112. A It has four basic functions
According to Jung there are three levels that make up the psyche such as consciousness, personal 
unconscious and collective unconscious. The consciousness has four basic functions, namely thinking, feeling, sensing and intuiting. The personal unconscious which is made up of an individual's unique experiences involving repression is accessible through recall. The collective unconscious is where the mind has inherited characteristics that influence how one reacts and the type of experiences these will be. This includes archetypes that are representational images with symbolic meaning.
113. A Expression of affect in a supportive environment
According to Yalom the following are descriptions of the therapeutic process that occur in group work:
•	Universality: where members recognise that the experiences are common and can link them to 
those that occur in society.
•	Corrective recapitulation of the primary family experience: patients repeat childhood experiences in their family with the group, without their knowledge.
•	Imitative behaviour: individuals improve their interactions in the group by modelling other's helpful behaviours of communication and listening.
•	Interpersonal learning: gives feedback on how they are seen by others.
•	Catharsis: when the individual feels unburdened difficult emotions, by expressing affect in a supportive environment.
•	Group cohesiveness: members have a sense of being incorporated with others.
•	Imparting of information: learning from others relating to their difficulties.
•	Instillation of hope: seeing other members improve.
•	Development of socialising techniques: members enhance their socialising skills through the supportive environment.
•	Existential factors: encouraged to take responsibility for one's thoughts, feelings and actions.
•	Self-understanding: develop a deeper understanding of the self with regard to their interactions with other members.
•	Altruism: improving one's self-esteem as members learn that they can help each other.
114.  B Members of the family are 'prescribed' their symptom 
which can paradoxically lead to an alteration
The following techniques are used in systemic family therapy:
•	In-session, structural interventions: different positions are assigned to parts of the family 
structure.
•	Paradoxical injunction: members of the family are 'prescribed' their symptom which can 
paradoxically lead to an alteration.
•	Reciprocity negotiation: practical solutions are developed between family members.
•	Homework: tasks are assigned to family members to complete between sessions; these involve a change in their actions to see how it affects the system.
•	Adjust to the symptom: thought is given to how to live with symptoms if they cannot be altered.
115. E Systemic family therapy
This is the treatment of choice for adolescents with anorexia nervosa and is particularly effective with early onset anorexia. By the end of therapy, >50% reach a healthy weight' . 60–90% of patients with anorexia recover completely, with only 10–15% continuing to be seriously ill. It is included in the NICE guideline recommendations under psychological interventions.
The different systemic approaches developed include: Test questions: 1 44
•	Structural
•	Strategic
•	Milan systemic
•	Narrative
•	Psychoeducational
•	Behavioural.
The structural approach looks at the family structure; it considers this as the family structure with 
generational hierarchies and semipermeable boundaries important for family function. Strategic systemic therapy is based on the hypothesis that behaviours that aim to suppress the symptoms in turn maintain it. The Milan systemic approach has changed over the years from the style of using paradoxical questioning to that of reflexive and circular questioning. The technique focuses on questioning various family members about their relationships. Narrative therapy involves helping families to create stories as a means of interpreting events. The psychoeducational approach 
combines behavioural and structural techniques. The behavioural approach uses techniques to 
maximise the positive and minimise the negative through goal setting, contingency contracting and operant conditioning.
116. B Cognitive–behavioural therapy
As recommended by the NICE guidelines, CBT is recommended as a psychological intervention in depression as well as for a variety of other presentations. There are randomised controlled trials to support its use. It is considered to be a short-term, problem-focused, psychosocial intervention and does not aim to achieve major personality change. It explores and works on the inter-relationship between one's thoughts, feelings, physiological reactions and behaviours.
There are three main areas of dysfunction identified in CBT such as conditional assumptions, 
negative automatic thoughts and core beliefs
117. C Excessive responsibility
In cognitive therapy, the cognitive errors derived from assumptions include the following:
•	Assuming temporal causality: if it was true in the past then it will always be true
•	Catastrophising: always think the worst and then it will happen
•	Dichotomous thinking: things are viewed as extremes, either bad or good
•	Excessive responsibility: assume personal responsibility for all negative outcomes
•	Over-generalising: if it happens at one time then it will happen in all cases
•	Selective abstraction: attention is given only to failure and negative outcomes
•	Self-references: my bad performance is the centre of everyone's attention.
118. B It was developed by Linehan
Dialectic behavioural therapy (DBT) is an integrative therapy developed by Marsha Linehan. It is 
beneficial in individuals with borderline personality disorder. DBT involves group and individual interventions with social skills training, mindfulness and mediation. It is an intensive therapy with weekly and daily sessions that can extend up to 2 years.
119. E Target assessment
Eye movement desensitisation and reprocessing (EMDR) was developed by Francine Shapiro and is a treatment for post-traumatic stress disorder. There are several stages of EMDR. It begins with history and preparation. During target assessment, the target traumatic memory is explored and defined. Desensitisation is the therapist's directed evocation of the picture, which represents the memory image to desensitise. During installation, the patient is asked to recall the trauma and to  Answers: MCQs 45
hold in mind the preferred positive, and is then treated with repeated sets of eye movements. The 
next stage is body scan which involves asking the patient to close the eyes and focus on bodily sensations. Finally there is closure and re-evaluation.
Habit reversal training is a behavioural treatment package useful in tics and other obsessive–
compulsive spectrum disorders, trichotillomania, nail biting, etc. It has the following components: awareness training, competing response training, contingency management, relaxation training and generalisation training.
120. D Step 4–considered if there is high risk of self-harm
According to the NICE clinical guidance, the following steps should be considered as treatment of generalised anxiety disorder (GAD).
Step 1: it is for identification and assessment in all known and suspected cases of GAD.
Step 2: once diagnosed with GAD, if there is no improvement after education or watching in primary care, low level psychological therapy is considered.Step 3: if step 2 has failed, a high level of psychological therapy such as CBT and applied relaxation is considered. In addition, medication is considered at this step.Step 4: if there is high risk of self-harm, self-neglect, failed step 3 or complex GAD condition, then day hospital or inpatient stay can be considered in addition to medication and psychological therapy.
121.  E There is a good research base for psychological 
management for comorbid disorders seen in ASPD
Most of the therapies, when used in the criminal justice system, aim to reduce offending behaviour. These therapies such as behavioural modification, graded exposure, problem-solving techniques and social skills training are largely based on social learning theory. Virtually all interventions delivered in the criminal justice system are aimed at reducing offending behaviour.
122.  C Drug treatments have a higher relapse rate than CBT 
on discontinuation in generalised anxiety disorder
Most trials that have been done with the combination of CBT and medication in mild-to-moderate depression did not show that they were more effective than either alone. Stuart and Bowers (1995) showed, in an inpatient population, that the combination of CBT and antidepressants was more effective than medication alone in those with more severe depression. Evidence suggests that CBT is as effective as antidepressant medication in outpatient depression. The combination of CBT and antidepressant medication may be more effective than either alone in severe depression. After ending treatment, relapse rates of depression are lower with CBT than with antidepressants. Drug treatment has a higher relapse rate than CBT on discontinuation in anxiety.
123. B Debriefing
The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) guidance does not recommend debriefing. There is some evidence that this can actually be more harmful. Rose et al (2009) found that psychological debriefing as a control or educational intervention can be worse or at the most equivalent in reducing severity or PTSD. It may even increase the risk of PTSD and depression. There is no evidence to support the routine use of debriefing in PTSD. Test questions: 1 46
124. B Flooding
This occurs in vivo and is also known as implosion. The therapist exposes the patient to a controlled 
environment to evoke anxiety and no hierarchy is employed. Here the anxiety is generated but the patient is prevented from escaping.
125. B Motivation to change
Group therapy is a therapy in which carefully selected members guided by a therapist help one another to bring about personality change. Membership of a group uses the following inclusion criteria: motivation to change, ability to perform the group task, problem areas compatible with the goals of the group, compatibility with the group norms and ability to tolerate group setting.
126. C Dialectic behavioural therapy
In the NICE guidelines for borderline personality disorder, there is a recommendation to consider dialectic behavioural therapy for women with borderline personality disorder who repeatedly self-harm.
127.  B After long-term deprivation children become 
self-sufficient through detachment
The long-term effect of short-term deprivation is separation anxiety which is also associated with long-term deprivation. Short-term deprivation includes admissions for mother or child into hospital for a period of < 3 months. Long-term deprivation follows death and more commonly these days 
divorce. The effects include detachment, clinging behaviour, oscillation between clinging and detachment, increased aggressive behaviour or psychosomatic reactions.
128. A Being abused as a child
Risk characteristics of parents who abuse children include being a single parent, young age, abused themselves as a child, low self-esteem, unrealistic expectations of the child's development, and inconsistent or punishment-oriented discipline. Risk factors of the environment for child abuse include social isolation, current stress and a large family.
129. A About 60% of couples cohabit before they marry
Couples who cohabit before marriage are less likely to be satisfied by their marriages. About 40% of couples who cohabit do not marry. Married people tend to live longer, are happier and healthier, and have lower rates of mental illnesses than divorced, single or widowed individuals. Divorce rates are highest in the first 5 years of life and then again after 15–25 years of being married. The highest divorce rate in individuals in England and Wales is for those in their late 20s.
130. E Parents have other mental health problems
The presence of the following vulnerability factors in parents can be useful in identifying children at risk of developing conduct problems:
•	Parents with other mental health problems
•	Parents with substance misuse and/or alcohol problem
•	Mother younger than 18 years of age who has a history of being maltreated in childhood
•	Parents who were in residential care
•	Parents with history of involvement with criminal justice system, either past or present. Answers: MCQs 47
131.  E There is a statistically significant association  
between sexual abuse and lifetime diagnosis  
of sleep disorders
In addition to sleep disorders, sexual abuse is also associated with several other mental disorders 
such as suicide attempts, depression, eating disorder, PTSD, emotionally unstable personality disorder and anxiety disorders. This association is independent of gender and the age when the abuse occurred. If there is a history of rape, it increases the association of sexual abuse, depression and eating disorder. 