101.  D Puberty lasts longer than in the  
previous generations
The age of reaching puberty has decreased in the western population from 17 years to below 12–13 years. The average age of menarche in Britain is 12 years and 10 months. One in six girls reaches puberty before the age of 8 years and one in fourteen 8-year-old boys have pubic hair. Puberty starts earlier and lasts longer according to the children of the 1990s' study conducted by Bristol University's Institute of Child Health. It is noticed that boys also mature earlier.
102. E 40%
Thomas et al (1968) conducted a study of temperament in infants in the 1950s. Data was gathered initially by parental interviews that looked at nine traits that were combined to describe three temperament types. Answers: MCQs 41
 Table 1.3 Types of temperament
Temperament Percentage 
in cohortDescription
Easy 40 Playful, regular patterns of eating and sleeping, adapted easily to new situations
Difficult 10 Irritable with irregular eating and sleeping patterns. Responded negatively to new situations
Slow to warm 15 Relatively inactive and tends to withdraw from new situations
The remaining 35% of children could not be placed in any one group.
103. C Non-negotiable parents who are strict
There are three main parenting styles described. An authoritarian parenting style is where parents 
do not negotiate and are strict. The boundaries set are clear and rigid. The children tend to have  low self-esteem and can be socially withdrawn. An authoritative parenting style is where parents discuss and explain to the child so that there are firm rules with shared decision-making. The children are usually sociable and popular and have a positive self-esteem. A permissive parenting style is where there are few limits set by the parents with no clear guidelines and the children usually have poor impulse control and display aggression.
104. B Child experiences maternal deprivation
According to Bowlby, if a child before the age of 1 year is separated from the mother when she is working, maternal deprivation is likely to occur. Rarely, privation, where no attachment is formed, may occur. Separation anxiety may develop. Object permanence development will not be affected. The strange situation test is an inappropriate test because the child may not respond when the mother returns as a sign of self-reliance rather than avoidance. This occurs because the child is used to separation.
105.  D Studies use it in the context of intergenerational 
transfer of attachment patterns
The adult attachment interview is a structured interview that explores an individual's experience of attachment relationships in childhood. There are four possible attachment styles such as:
1. Secure/autonomous
2. Dismissive3. Preoccupied/entangled4. Unresolved/disorganised.
Studies mainly use it in the context of intergenerational transfer of attachment patterns or 
intergenerational continuity. In summary, people parent their children as they were parented.
106.  D The paranoid–depressive positions are never  
fully resolved in adult life
The work with regard to paranoid and depressive positions was led primarily by Melanie Klein. In this case, an infant divides the caregiver into an external object that is all good or an internal object that is all bad. This includes two stages known as the depressive position and the paranoid–schizoid  Test questions: 1 42
position. Projection, splitting and projective identification are the primitive defence mechanisms 
observed in the paranoid–schizoid position.
107. E Winnicot
Winnicot proposed the following concepts:
•	Holding environment indicates that, for appropriate development in a child, a parent needs to 
hold them physically and psychologically.
•	Good-enough mother is a mother who needs to be responsive but not extreme, as in too responsive or unresponsive, to ensure adequate emotional development in the infant.
•	Countertransference hate means that parents, like infants, can bring strong emotions to their care such as hate, which needs to be addressed.
108.  E More than one dream idea is combined  
into a single mental image
A dream, according to Freud, is the fulfilment of a wish. Manifest content refers to what we are aware of upon waking. Dream interpretation is the process of making sense of the manifest content of dreams by 'translating' it. In dream work, the latent content, the 'underlying wish' , is changed into manifest content and involves displacement, condensation and concrete representation. Displacement is the dream content that substitutes the target of one's feelings onto another person. Condensation is more than one dream's idea combined into a single mental image. Concrete representation is an abstract concept, revealed in a concrete way and is sometimes called 
dramatisation.
109.  C The symptoms may symbolise the wish with  
which they are linked
Neurotic symptoms are viewed as similar to dreams. Dreams are considered to be the 'royal road to 
unconsciousness' . The symptoms are felt to be the expression of an unconscious and may symbolise the wish to which it is linked. The symptom is usually physical and the cause mental.
110.  B Appropriate roles or goals are abandoned because 
they are perceived as forbidden or dangerous
Cognitive–analytical therapy was devised by Anthony Ryle for use in the UK National Health Service. Three different patterns of unrevisable, maladaptive procedures called traps, dilemmas and snags are described.
Traps are negative assumptions that generate acts which produce consequences that reinforce 
the assumptions. Dilemmas are brought about by the person acting as though the available actions or roles are limited to only polarised alternatives (false dichotomies). Snags occur when the appropriate roles or goals are abandoned because the individual makes an assumption that others would oppose, or because they are perceived as forbidden or dangerous.
111. B Displacement
Defence mechanisms are unconscious ways of dealing with experiences. Denial occurs when the individual does not acknowledge an aspect of reality. Displacement is shifting of the emotion from the real target onto a substitute. Humour is where comedy is used to manage the emotions that arise and express them. Reaction formation is where the individual expresses the opposite of what is felt or thought. In sublimation, an individual channels the emotions towards a socially positive substituted activity. Answers: MCQs 43
112. A It has four basic functions
According to Jung there are three levels that make up the psyche such as consciousness, personal 
unconscious and collective unconscious. The consciousness has four basic functions, namely thinking, feeling, sensing and intuiting. The personal unconscious which is made up of an individual's unique experiences involving repression is accessible through recall. The collective unconscious is where the mind has inherited characteristics that influence how one reacts and the type of experiences these will be. This includes archetypes that are representational images with symbolic meaning.
113. A Expression of affect in a supportive environment
According to Yalom the following are descriptions of the therapeutic process that occur in group work:
•	Universality: where members recognise that the experiences are common and can link them to 
those that occur in society.
•	Corrective recapitulation of the primary family experience: patients repeat childhood experiences in their family with the group, without their knowledge.
•	Imitative behaviour: individuals improve their interactions in the group by modelling other's helpful behaviours of communication and listening.
•	Interpersonal learning: gives feedback on how they are seen by others.
•	Catharsis: when the individual feels unburdened difficult emotions, by expressing affect in a supportive environment.
•	Group cohesiveness: members have a sense of being incorporated with others.
•	Imparting of information: learning from others relating to their difficulties.
•	Instillation of hope: seeing other members improve.
•	Development of socialising techniques: members enhance their socialising skills through the supportive environment.
•	Existential factors: encouraged to take responsibility for one's thoughts, feelings and actions.
•	Self-understanding: develop a deeper understanding of the self with regard to their interactions with other members.
•	Altruism: improving one's self-esteem as members learn that they can help each other.
114.  B Members of the family are 'prescribed' their symptom 
which can paradoxically lead to an alteration
The following techniques are used in systemic family therapy:
•	In-session, structural interventions: different positions are assigned to parts of the family 
structure.
•	Paradoxical injunction: members of the family are 'prescribed' their symptom which can 
paradoxically lead to an alteration.
•	Reciprocity negotiation: practical solutions are developed between family members.
•	Homework: tasks are assigned to family members to complete between sessions; these involve a change in their actions to see how it affects the system.
•	Adjust to the symptom: thought is given to how to live with symptoms if they cannot be altered.
115. E Systemic family therapy
This is the treatment of choice for adolescents with anorexia nervosa and is particularly effective with early onset anorexia. By the end of therapy, >50% reach a healthy weight' . 60–90% of patients with anorexia recover completely, with only 10–15% continuing to be seriously ill. It is included in the NICE guideline recommendations under psychological interventions.
The different systemic approaches developed include: Test questions: 1 44
•	Structural
•	Strategic
•	Milan systemic
•	Narrative
•	Psychoeducational
•	Behavioural.
The structural approach looks at the family structure; it considers this as the family structure with 
generational hierarchies and semipermeable boundaries important for family function. Strategic systemic therapy is based on the hypothesis that behaviours that aim to suppress the symptoms in turn maintain it. The Milan systemic approach has changed over the years from the style of using paradoxical questioning to that of reflexive and circular questioning. The technique focuses on questioning various family members about their relationships. Narrative therapy involves helping families to create stories as a means of interpreting events. The psychoeducational approach 
combines behavioural and structural techniques. The behavioural approach uses techniques to 
maximise the positive and minimise the negative through goal setting, contingency contracting and operant conditioning.
116. B Cognitive–behavioural therapy
As recommended by the NICE guidelines, CBT is recommended as a psychological intervention in depression as well as for a variety of other presentations. There are randomised controlled trials to support its use. It is considered to be a short-term, problem-focused, psychosocial intervention and does not aim to achieve major personality change. It explores and works on the inter-relationship between one's thoughts, feelings, physiological reactions and behaviours.
There are three main areas of dysfunction identified in CBT such as conditional assumptions, 
negative automatic thoughts and core beliefs
117. C Excessive responsibility
In cognitive therapy, the cognitive errors derived from assumptions include the following:
•	Assuming temporal causality: if it was true in the past then it will always be true
•	Catastrophising: always think the worst and then it will happen
•	Dichotomous thinking: things are viewed as extremes, either bad or good
•	Excessive responsibility: assume personal responsibility for all negative outcomes
•	Over-generalising: if it happens at one time then it will happen in all cases
•	Selective abstraction: attention is given only to failure and negative outcomes
•	Self-references: my bad performance is the centre of everyone's attention.
118. B It was developed by Linehan
Dialectic behavioural therapy (DBT) is an integrative therapy developed by Marsha Linehan. It is 
beneficial in individuals with borderline personality disorder. DBT involves group and individual interventions with social skills training, mindfulness and mediation. It is an intensive therapy with weekly and daily sessions that can extend up to 2 years.
119. E Target assessment
Eye movement desensitisation and reprocessing (EMDR) was developed by Francine Shapiro and is a treatment for post-traumatic stress disorder. There are several stages of EMDR. It begins with history and preparation. During target assessment, the target traumatic memory is explored and defined. Desensitisation is the therapist's directed evocation of the picture, which represents the memory image to desensitise. During installation, the patient is asked to recall the trauma and to  Answers: MCQs 45
hold in mind the preferred positive, and is then treated with repeated sets of eye movements. The 
next stage is body scan which involves asking the patient to close the eyes and focus on bodily sensations. Finally there is closure and re-evaluation.
Habit reversal training is a behavioural treatment package useful in tics and other obsessive–
compulsive spectrum disorders, trichotillomania, nail biting, etc. It has the following components: awareness training, competing response training, contingency management, relaxation training and generalisation training.
120. D Step 4–considered if there is high risk of self-harm
According to the NICE clinical guidance, the following steps should be considered as treatment of generalised anxiety disorder (GAD).
Step 1: it is for identification and assessment in all known and suspected cases of GAD.
Step 2: once diagnosed with GAD, if there is no improvement after education or watching in primary care, low level psychological therapy is considered.Step 3: if step 2 has failed, a high level of psychological therapy such as CBT and applied relaxation is considered. In addition, medication is considered at this step.Step 4: if there is high risk of self-harm, self-neglect, failed step 3 or complex GAD condition, then day hospital or inpatient stay can be considered in addition to medication and psychological therapy.
121.  E There is a good research base for psychological 
management for comorbid disorders seen in ASPD
Most of the therapies, when used in the criminal justice system, aim to reduce offending behaviour. These therapies such as behavioural modification, graded exposure, problem-solving techniques and social skills training are largely based on social learning theory. Virtually all interventions delivered in the criminal justice system are aimed at reducing offending behaviour.
122.  C Drug treatments have a higher relapse rate than CBT 
on discontinuation in generalised anxiety disorder
Most trials that have been done with the combination of CBT and medication in mild-to-moderate depression did not show that they were more effective than either alone. Stuart and Bowers (1995) showed, in an inpatient population, that the combination of CBT and antidepressants was more effective than medication alone in those with more severe depression. Evidence suggests that CBT is as effective as antidepressant medication in outpatient depression. The combination of CBT and antidepressant medication may be more effective than either alone in severe depression. After ending treatment, relapse rates of depression are lower with CBT than with antidepressants. Drug treatment has a higher relapse rate than CBT on discontinuation in anxiety.
123. B Debriefing
The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) guidance does not recommend debriefing. There is some evidence that this can actually be more harmful. Rose et al (2009) found that psychological debriefing as a control or educational intervention can be worse or at the most equivalent in reducing severity or PTSD. It may even increase the risk of PTSD and depression. There is no evidence to support the routine use of debriefing in PTSD. Test questions: 1 46
124. B Flooding
This occurs in vivo and is also known as implosion. The therapist exposes the patient to a controlled 
environment to evoke anxiety and no hierarchy is employed. Here the anxiety is generated but the patient is prevented from escaping.
125. B Motivation to change
Group therapy is a therapy in which carefully selected members guided by a therapist help one another to bring about personality change. Membership of a group uses the following inclusion criteria: motivation to change, ability to perform the group task, problem areas compatible with the goals of the group, compatibility with the group norms and ability to tolerate group setting.
126. C Dialectic behavioural therapy
In the NICE guidelines for borderline personality disorder, there is a recommendation to consider dialectic behavioural therapy for women with borderline personality disorder who repeatedly self-harm.
127.  B After long-term deprivation children become 
self-sufficient through detachment
The long-term effect of short-term deprivation is separation anxiety which is also associated with long-term deprivation. Short-term deprivation includes admissions for mother or child into hospital for a period of < 3 months. Long-term deprivation follows death and more commonly these days 
divorce. The effects include detachment, clinging behaviour, oscillation between clinging and detachment, increased aggressive behaviour or psychosomatic reactions.
128. A Being abused as a child
Risk characteristics of parents who abuse children include being a single parent, young age, abused themselves as a child, low self-esteem, unrealistic expectations of the child's development, and inconsistent or punishment-oriented discipline. Risk factors of the environment for child abuse include social isolation, current stress and a large family.
129. A About 60% of couples cohabit before they marry
Couples who cohabit before marriage are less likely to be satisfied by their marriages. About 40% of couples who cohabit do not marry. Married people tend to live longer, are happier and healthier, and have lower rates of mental illnesses than divorced, single or widowed individuals. Divorce rates are highest in the first 5 years of life and then again after 15–25 years of being married. The highest divorce rate in individuals in England and Wales is for those in their late 20s.
130. E Parents have other mental health problems
The presence of the following vulnerability factors in parents can be useful in identifying children at risk of developing conduct problems:
•	Parents with other mental health problems
•	Parents with substance misuse and/or alcohol problem
•	Mother younger than 18 years of age who has a history of being maltreated in childhood
•	Parents who were in residential care
•	Parents with history of involvement with criminal justice system, either past or present. Answers: MCQs 47
131.  E There is a statistically significant association  
between sexual abuse and lifetime diagnosis  
of sleep disorders
In addition to sleep disorders, sexual abuse is also associated with several other mental disorders 
such as suicide attempts, depression, eating disorder, PTSD, emotionally unstable personality disorder and anxiety disorders. This association is independent of gender and the age when the abuse occurred. If there is a history of rape, it increases the association of sexual abuse, depression and eating disorder. 